have you experienced deja vu it's that
shadowy feeling you get when a situation
seems familiar
a scene in a restaurant plays out
exactly as you remember the world moves
like a ballet you've choreographed but
the sequence can't be based on a past
experience because you've never eaten
here before this is the first time
you've had clams so what's going on
unfortunately there isn't one single
explanation for deja vu the experience
is brief and occurs without notice
making it nearly impossible for
scientists to record and study it
scientists can't simply sit around and
wait for it to happen to them this could
take years it is no physical
manifestations and in studies it's
described by the subject as a sensation
or feeling because of this lack of hard
evidence there's been a surplus of
speculation over the years since Emil
wallrock introduced deja vu as a French
term meaning already seen more than 40
theories attempt to explain this
phenomenon still recent advancements in
neuroimaging and cognitive psychology
narrow down the field of prospects let's
walk through three of today's more
prevalent theories using the same
restaurant setting for each first up is
dual processing we'll need an action
let's go with a waiter dropping a tray
of dishes as the scene unfolds your
brains hemispheres process a flurry of
information the waiters flailing arms
his cry for help the smell of pasta
within milliseconds this information
zips through pathways and is processed
into a single moment most of the time
everything is recorded in sync however
this theory asserts that deja vu occurs
when there is a slight delay in
information from one of these pathways
the difference in arrival times causes
the brain to interpret the late
information as a separate event when it
plays over the already recorded moment
it feels as if it's happened before
because in a sense it has our next
Theory deals with a confusion of the
past rather than a mistake in the
present this is the hologram theory and
we'll use that tablecloth to examine it
as you scan its squares a distant memory
swims up from deep within your brain
according to the theory this is because
memories are stored in the form of
holograms and in Holograms you only need
one fragment to see the whole picture
your brain has identified the tablecloth
with one from the past maybe from your
grandmother's house
however instead of remembering that
you've seen this pattern at your
grandmother's your brain has summoned up
the old memory without identifying it
this leaves you stuck with familiarity
but no recollection although you've
never been in this restaurant you've
seen that tablecloth but are just
failing to identify it now look at this
Fork are you paying attention
our last theory is divided attention and
it states that deja vu occurs when our
brain subliminally takes in an
environment while we're distracted by
one particular object when our attention
returns we feel as if we've been here
before for example just now you focused
on the fork and didn't observe the
tablecloth or the falling waiter
although your brain has been recording
everything in your peripheral vision
it's been doing so below conscious
awareness when you finally pull yourself
away from the fork you think you've been
here before because you have you just
weren't paying attention while all three
of these theories share the common
features of deja vu none of them
proposed to be the conclusive source of
the phenomenon still while we wait for
researchers and inventors to come up
with new ways to capture this fleeting
moment we can study the moment ourselves
after all most studies of deja vu are
based on first-hand accounts so why
can't one be yours the next time you get
deja vu take a moment to think about it
have you been distracted is there a
familiar object somewhere is your brain
just acting slow or is it something else
you